A show truly ends when the conversation
that night finishes.
>> Oh, I just got a little [laughter] I
just got a little tear in my eye. I'm
Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball.
Today, Tony Tony Tony.
Every spring I do this nutty thing where
I try and see as much theater as I can
in about two months. like one day at the
end of every March, [laughter]
this alarm goes off and I'm like, "Oh,
right. I kind of miss going to shows."
For me, it's a convenient way to do
things since the Tony's are usually
somewhere on the horizon. And it's kind
of nice to know what the theater
industry likes. I spent one of my first
nights on this spree at Lincoln Center
watching the latest revival of Ragtime.
The show is set at the dawn of the 20th
century and it's a tragedy with sweeping
songs and some tension between like
lefty politics as represented by
socialist Jews and radicalized black
people and these more conservative
racist forces trying to arrest and
suppress them. It opened on Broadway in
1998. It's based on a novel that Eel
Dootoro wrote and you know it's a novel
that on no occasion that I have read it
ever said make me a musical. There's
just too much going on. But Terrence
McN, one of our finest playwrights, Lynn
Arens, one of our great lyricists, and
Steven Flity, who did the music, which
is really good, they all beg to differ.
And so from the opening number, the
grandeur of this show is already bowling
you over.
[music]
[singing]
skipping [music]
sing
[singing]
>> and it's clear that this is a musical.
That opening number is in the key that
just seeps into your marrow. It's got a
little bit of showbiz and a little bit
of gospel.
[music]
[cheering]
>> One of the main characters is this
musician. His name is Cole House Walker.
He's like a shoulders back, chest out
monument to dignity. He loves his car
and a woman named Sarah. And when
terrible things happen to both, Cole
House comes basically undone. And the
show culminates with his last number.
It's called Make Them Hear You. and say
to those who blame us for the way we
chose to fight that sometimes there are
battles that are more than black or
white. [singing]
>> The way Joshua Henry performs this thing
like from the soles of his feet and the
[music] bottom of his soul, you
[laughter] you just kind of have to
shake your head at the pure force and
control of his singing.
near [singing] you.
I'll be near you.
I mean, I shook my head. The rest of the
room, they leapt to their feet and they
applauded. They weren't at a musical
anymore. They were [laughter]
they were at a concert. They were at a
campaign rally.
>> [music]
>> I mean, it was a rousing night at the
theater and the art that got made that
night felt good to everybody. It made us
feel powerful and this show, I mean, it
had people talking back to the action.
It had white people talking back at the
action. Lock him up, this woman next to
me said about the racists who were
definitely not locked up.
And it's a little wild to be sitting in
a room full of mostly white people
feeling congratulated for knowing what
injustice looks like. I mean, I get the
appeal of being at a show that knows
where you live, but this I don't know.
This isn't why I go to the theater to
have my values reflected back at me.
Ragtime is a big capital eye important
show that also I mean at least in this
production kind of takes it easy on us.
And that ease is for me what defined the
Broadway season this year. I saw a few
things I liked a lot, but as a
collection of shows, everything seemed
to want me to feel great, to give me my
money's worth, to appeal to my goodness
or dignity or love of famous people. And
you know, I am not here to argue with
getting what you paid for. You've seen
the prices. But I also missed work that
made me uncomfortable in a good way.
that that challenged what I thought the
theater could be to be wild and weird or
tamed but challenging. What I what I
[clears throat] missed was
difficulty. So with the Tony's all set
to be handed out this Sunday, I wanted
to think through what I even mean by
difficulty with the New York Times
theater critic Helen Shaw. She knows a
lot more than I do about the theater and
how shows are made and the power they
have to affect us.
Helen Shaw, welcome to Cannonball.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Um, okay. I do this thing every year. I
don't know if I had mentioned this to
you. I do a stupid thing mostly because
I am a poor planner.
>> Mhm.
>> And I wind up spending I see all my
theater for the year in two months.
>> It's not good. I just I don't have my
act together enough to like get get the
tickets
>> to know when I'd be able to go. But
anyway, the the reason to mention this
is
>> I doing it in this in this sort of spree
format
>> really does
crystallize some things. There are
things about a season that start to make
a kind of sense or not make sense to me.
>> There are themes that emerge. Um, so I'm
actually curious to talk to you a little
bit about like what you think has been
going on for the 2025 2026
theater season in New York City.
>> Well, the interesting thing about
collapsing it into these eight weeks is
that it means that you are missing some
shows that I missed a couple things,
right?
>> And I know that some of the shows that
you missed therefore are are really mood
setters. So you missed
>> Edipus.
>> Edipus
>> liberation
>> liberation waiting for God and also
>> the Ke Reeves.
>> Yes. Yes. Yeah.
>> I've seen I've seen that.
>> You've seen it. I've seen that.
>> Did you see the one with Kiana Reeves?
The
>> waiting for I've seen Kiana Reeves and
Alex Winter sort of do fan service.
>> Yes. Okay. Harsh. Harsh, but [laughter]
real. And um criticism can be practiced
in these short pathy ways. But um so the
reason we're talking now is because
we're about to have the Tony's, right?
>> And I think we're all pretty familiar
with the idea of recency bias that we
have this belief. Yes. That if you if
you back your show right up to the Tony
deadline, then you have a better shot at
the Tony.
>> So things that think that they could win
a Tony
>> are [laughter] going to hit April so
hard, like perhaps a cannibal. Use a
phrase.
>> Oh boy. And so you want you know that
you're going to get maximum razledazzle.
>> I don't think that for the 10,000
reasons they did waiting for God which
is um a challenging and beautiful piece
of existentialist.
>> This is not about what Samuel Beckett
did. This is
>> those people are not doing that show in
order to get Tony's. No.
>> No. They're doing it for strange and
beautiful reasons of their own. Are they
doing it strangely and beautifully? We
can argue. But they are definitely not
doing it to get Tony's.
>> So if you watch all your shows in April,
what you are going to get is a sense
that this is a super commercial, super
populist, super touristoriented
season. And I don't know if that's fair
>> uh to me, Helen. Is it fair to me?
[laughter]
>> I mean, you made your choices.
>> Uh I did make my choices. Um but I I the
the sense that I got in my little spree
was I mean I just my question was where
is the ambition?
>> Where is the difficulty?
>> Uh is my mind being expanded? Is my
understanding of a work being expanded?
Um do I have to keep up with this thing
in a way that I find exciting and
challenging and healthy? And I would say
by and large that did not happen to me.
>> So all right. So difficulty
and and we mean difficulty as a positive
attribute.
>> I just want to be clear. I I want
difficulty. I want to be difficultized.
>> You want to be difficult just all over.
>> Your difficulty all over me. Yes.
>> And if I can't keep up that's on me, Tom
Stoppppard. You know, I might have to
see Arcadia 17 times.
>> That's right. You better. I'm better for
it.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> Um, theater was designed and I I swore
to myself I would not mention Aristotle,
but theater is designed to
>> not you can't I mean I've doodled him
all over every page, but he is. So the
idea of theater as a forum is right at
the heart of why we go to shows is you
get your whole team together, your whole
voting body together and you sit in a
room and someone goes up on stage and is
like feminism. What's with that? And
then we all think about it together.
>> Right. Right.
>> And when a play is or a musical is
brave, they don't close the loop.
>> Right. Like it trains us in negative
capability. It uses,
"Hi, I'm an emotionally difficult play.
I've decided to bring up an issue for
you." And then I watch it close the loop
>> and I'm like, "Oh, you found an answer."
>> Or you knew I needed to get home. I had
a cab to catch.
>> I exactly how did you answer feminism in
just an hour and a half? No
intermission.
>> Yeah. I find
one of the pleasures of the theatergoing
experience of any art is that
I don't have all the answers
>> and I have more questions than anything.
What I want is more I want new
questions, right? I want a work that is
also going to maybe
>> have the questions I have
>> and give them a forum for exploration
and dramatization.
Um, I can be more specific, but I'm just
wondering, uh, even in So, I'll tell you
some things I saw, by the way. Um,
Catch the Jelical Ball. I've seen Becky
Shaw. I have seen
>> You saw Proof.
>> I've seen Proof. I've seen Joe Turner's
Come and Gone.
>> Um, I've seen Ragtime and Giant.
>> I just I was underwhelmed at every
possible turn. Um, just about there were
a couple things I saw in this in this in
this batch of like maybe more than a
dozen shows that I that I loved.
>> Okay.
>> Um,
>> start from love. What was the thing you
loved most this season?
>> I mean, so
the lift of a show like Jellico the
cat's musical.
>> Um, Jellico Ball the Cats musical.
>> Apologies to Lord Andrew Lloyd Weber.
Yes. Yeah. No, [laughter] there be no
apologies necessary. This is what that
man needed. Yeah.
>> Um I think what I loved about that show
is it's ambition happens before we get
to it,
>> right? This is taking the people who
made this show basically I assume have
experienced cats in numerous ways,
modes, states of of sobriety and in
sobriety
>> and have wondered
>> what the [__] is going on with this show
>> and how can we make it make sense
because it seems like he's tapped into
something
>> that I recognize in my own life and that
is the ball scene, the drag ball scene.
>> Um, gay culture
>> and the collision of of these of these
queer balls
>> and Andrew Lloyd Weber's cats is
ingenious.
Uh, I had a really good time
experiencing
the ingenuity of this show um as an
adaptation.
>> Mhm. Yeah, I think you know because
we've been you had been talking about
this word ambition
>> and I think that um there are that one
of the types of ambition which is the
slightest and most difficult to identify
is camp ambition, right? Because camp
deliberately underplays
>> because camp is going to use the
materials of trash and kit in order to
make its kind of splendor,
>> right? And so this is a show that for me
at least sitting in the room with it, it
is really splendid. There are moments in
this cats that really overwhelm me. So
for instance, you have uh Junior Leia is
in it who I first saw in Paris's Burning
>> ball legend. ball legend
>> and is there and is not just there is
not just trotted out and is saying oh
look let us not forget
>> treated treated royally
>> treated like royalty
>> and has a function within the world of
the show
>> and and we all take this time to to not
just sort of drape this person in
literal splendor right is wearing these
astonishing robes and sort of jewels on
every finger
>> they're taking their time walking around
prancing around this not prancing is
wrong
>> there's no prancing It is a really I
mean just a courtly walk from one end of
the of the situ of the I mean it's a
stage the stage to the other. Um, yes.
And yes, it is a real celebration of
forgotten, dismissed, um, degraded,
um, sort of legally harassed to to say
the least,
>> uh, people. And there is something very
powerful about this interaction between
the work and the room.
>> Yep. the audience is there to to verify
and in the case of like this adaptation
having happened ratify uh this
production.
>> I agree and I but one of the things
about Cats the Jellico Ball is that it
is not self-s serious.
>> No.
>> And so yes, this is a great point.
>> Right. And so I feel like there is this
when we talk about things that are uh
excellence because we're we're trying to
talk about different types of excellence
and I think I think what you're saying
is that it was hard for you this season
to find the kind of excellence that
asked something of you.
>> Yes. Right.
>> Yes. Helen. Yes. Wait. I'm sorry.
[laughter] Yes.
>> And so this is a show that it is it is
asking things of you but it is doing it
in such a soft way. I mean it is it is
doing it in such a it is giving you so
much. There is an overabundance. The
only complaint I have ever heard about
this cats is wow there is a lot of it
right the portions [laughter] are so big
and so it really is it's like you come
out of that thing and you are just like
my lord I am just overwhelmed.
And I I think that that is easy to
mistake for
>> for ease and it's not. I don't think it
is. I don't think that cats I don't
think the jellical um iteration of cats
is easy.
>> Okay.
>> I do think that
>> it's got a different kind of ambition is
what I would say. Right.
>> It's ingenuity is it straightens out a
work that made no sense previously.
Correct.
>> And now it makes more sense.
>> Yes.
>> Um in the hands of of these of these of
these drag ball
>> Yeah. which is which which is strange.
Which is really strange, right? It it
does feel like, oh, this is what it was
supposed to mean all along. And I I
actually cannot think of a revival I've
ever been to where I thought, "Oh, oh,
that's what this is about."
>> So, okay. So, if Cats is your pinnacle
this season,
>> dare I ask what your low point was?
What's What's the hardest time you've
had in a room this this season?
>> I mean, there's a few, but I would say I
would start with I would choose Dog Day
Afternoon. Okay,
>> because
this is a this is the adaptation of the
Sydney Leette movie that came out in
1975. It is consider I mean it is a it
is a great American movie.
>> Um Al Puccini uh John Kazelle the stars
of this film uh Chris Sandon
>> uh I mean Charles Durning I mean you
know it's it's one of the great New York
movies. Um two men rob a bank for money
for one of the men's partner
wife. They're married at this point
>> to go through with a transition surgery.
>> That's the plot of Dog Day Afternoon,
>> released in 1975.
>> This show
is a set in one [clears throat] of a
reason for anything else that happens in
this show to exist. Uh John Bernthal and
Eban Moss Bakarak are the stars of this
thing. Jessica Hec has a small part.
She's the best thing in the show besides
the set itself. Um, the thing that makes
the the production design great is that
the the movie is set both in a bank and
on the street outside the bank. And so
what what the the ingenuity here is like
the the the the bank
can lever outward into the or inward
into the street and outward to become
the bank.
>> It's it's very smart.
>> Um, but that's all it is. And by the
time you've seen this thing go from bank
to street three or four times, I'm like,
"Call it a day. I'm done. [laughter]
I've had enough."
>> Well, I mean, so
>> did this work for you?
>> So, let me put it this way. [laughter]
>> Okay. So, I I teach and when my students
hit a piece of art or or I take them to
a show, uh, one of the things I tell
them is they're supposed to uh that they
shouldn't actually do the thing that is
the most common for us when we see a
piece of art, which is to ask ourselves,
did we like it?
>> Right? That's what we say on the subway
going home is, did you like it? Did you
like it? Did you like it?
And I am not sure that's a super
interesting question.
>> No, I never ask that question.
>> It's not right. It doesn't because first
of all, also uh I'm I am 49. I mean,
I've watched myself like and then unlike
and then reike things my whole life.
>> That's the journey. That's the journey
that we're on as people who watch and
listen to any cultural any culture. We
all change in in relation.
>> I loved cats as a 10-year-old. I hated
cats as a 17-year-old. I love cats as a
49year-old. What the hell happened to
me? So the the thing that I ask when I'm
thinking about a show is um Gerta's
three questions. This is something
you'll hit if you for instance have a
dramatur on your team. So the three
questions
>> dramatur of course being the person who
saves your show from going like saves
[laughter] saves the show from going any
further south than it's going and finds
the brilliance in an already brilliant
work and emphasizes that
>> the world of dramaty thanks you for that
definition. Yes, it is the person.
>> It's criticism. It's onset criticism.
>> It's onset criticism. Exactly. It's the
person who's sort of like who their task
is the text. They're supposed to be in
there looking at the text. Okay. So, G
has three questions. Number one, what is
this piece of art trying to do? Number
two, how is it executing that attempt?
And number three, and only after you've
answered those first two questions are
you allowed to ask this third question,
was it worth the attempt? [snorts] Okay.
So, what is this dog day afternoon
trying to do? We know that this starts
from the stars. We know that it starts
from the extraordinary relationship
between Eban and John who are friends
and colleagues uh going back to the bear
and I think possibly before they are um
uh they're excited by the theater.
They're people who both are involved in
the theater. And so is there something
that has the kind of ripe um vaguely
Alpuccino energy that Bernthal has and
the slippery um vaguely John Kazal
energy that Eban has? Is there something
to do with that excitement that at the
same time brings a conversation about
masculinity and trans rights into the
modern era where you can get a whole lot
of butts and seats to talk about how
beautiful these men are together, their
friendship, and also be asking about um
whether or not capitalism is crushing
these lives. Like I so to me when I look
at it, I don't think it's succeeded. I
really don't think it's succeeded. And I
think a big reason for that is because
it the adaptation was written by Steven
Edley Gerggas who's a playwright who
needs a lot of iterations. Who needs a
lot of
>> You mean his process of iterations?
Yeah.
>> So many. And I feel like
>> a drama
>> tur may I mean
>> just maybe two.
>> I mean possibly two. And this feels like
a show that got adapted halfway and then
it was like I guess it's go time.
>> And if you read any of the process
pieces
>> Yeah. It does feel undercooked. It feels
>> feels undercooked to me. But I don't
know. I kind of like treasure the
ingredients. So, I'm not as mad as you
are about it because I was like, "Hey, I
think I know what they were trying to do
here."
>> Um,
>> see, now I'm all positive. [laughter] I
I'm actually I have a heart like a
raisin. I'm a critic. I hate everything.
But now I'm all like, "No,
>> you don't hate everything." Helen, I
read you. You're like a very You're
extremely It's not even that you're
fair. I mean, you just
I think there's a real sense of like
what all is going on in a show
>> and some things work and some things
don't. And I just love the
comprehensiveness of the way you
approach the work, right? Like these
these works of art, you know, they're
not they're rarely completely perfect.
>> Um and they're rarely completely
terrible.
>> Yeah. Um, anyway, I actually [laughter]
want to talk about something that really
didn't work for me that worked for lots
and lots of other people that I think is
kind of in a weird way taking it easy on
us somehow.
>> Um, and it's giant
>> interesting.
>> It's a play.
>> And it's a play essentially about
I'm going to put it this way. That time
Rald Doll said some terrible things
about the Jews.
>> Yes.
And the entire play, as far as I'm
concerned, is I understand what it wants
to do, right? This is a show that is is
trying to
sort of resituate our thinking about how
we talk about
Israel's
sort of activities in the Middle East,
right? um its relationship to the
Palestinian people um its its mission of
self-preservation
um and self-defense and in whose name
and against whom it's taking those
conversations and you know can you talk
about can you criticize Israel and also
not be anti-semitic when you do it
>> all of those questions those fights we
are having now are taking place in this
play about Ronald Dah set in 1983
>> in his house which is under
construction. And the show is
essentially about, you know, him
responding to the arrival of his agent.
Is it
>> and his publisher?
>> Um or maybe it's
>> it's a woman from his publisher,
>> right? It's a woman from his publisher.
And essentially, they're worried about
his next book coming out, which is The
Witches. um and its ability to attract
sales based on some some
anti-Semitic things he wrote in a review
of a book about Israel's relationship to
Beirut in 1982. Not even Israel's uh
siege on Beirut in 1982.
>> Uh that's a lot.
>> Yeah. [gasps]
>> Yeah.
>> Um and the show is trying to wrestle
with these questions.
>> Yeah. My problem with it
>> is that I think that the only
interesting person in the show is the
monster.
>> The other characters don't matter to me.
I mean, they're not as interesting as he
is.
>> None of the actors is as good as John
Lithgow, who plays Rald Doll.
>> Um, so there's a real They're not
kidding about the giant part. [laughter]
>> Yes.
>> Lithgal looms large. Rald Doll looms
large. And I think the way the show is
built in some ways is kind of an
ingenious contraption, right? Like the
first act ends with the thing you've
been dreading happening. You know why
you're there.
>> Yep.
>> Um and it it gives it to you almost the
way a musical would give you like
>> the big number that brings the curtain
down. Except in this case, the big
number is
>> is
>> Hey, I mean I know Hitler sucked, but I
mean the Jews couldn't have been all
that good.
>> Yeah. Yeah,
>> I mean I'm paraphrasing, but that is
essentially what he says. [snorts]
>> So I So this is written by Mark
Rosenblat, who was a
>> he's a director, right?
>> He's a director and this is his first
play and he worked on this play for
years, but he it is his first play.
>> And I do think that you you feel that a
little bit. Not I'm not saying it's not
accomplished, but I think that it
doesn't, you know,
>> I don't think it's accomplished.
>> Well, here's why I think it's
accomplished. I think I think that
writing any character that is as complex
and ugly as the one as the doll in this
play is is a strength. [snorts]
>> I think what he does not square what
Rosenlot does not square is what do I do
with a lot of people on stage and I
think you would forgive him for saying
like that's the basic job. You have to
know why there's four people in a room
and if there's no reason for those four
people to be there then you better
reduce it to a two person scene. But the
real thing that's in the room with Rald
Doll is um his legacy. What you really
are fighting with is your love of the
books, your uh decision of whether or
not you're going to separate the art
from the artist. Right. Is he a monster?
Yep. Like that question is answered
awfully quickly.
>> Yes. And the play is a bit koi about
it's like I have this really gross
carrot and I'm going to dangle it here
at the end and you know what it's it's
you know what it's going to eat the
gross carrot
>> you and then they came back from
intermission [laughter]
>> and so it's sort of like it's
deliberately feeding us the poison.
>> But I think the thing that brings you
back from intermission is John Lithgow,
right?
>> Oh god. Yeah.
>> And I don't know Helen I don't know I
don't know [snorts] if that was enough
for me. I mean he's very good obviously
but I mean
>> I think the reason I think the show is
taking it easy on us
>> is that
>> it's I mean I think all of us going to
this show know what is what is morally
abhorent about his views
>> y
>> and I don't know I just wish that it had
I wish the show had made me
uncomfortable at all. I was not
uncomfortable
>> at all by this. Well, so I was
uncomfortable a couple of times, but
partially because there are a couple of
phrases that I literally won't even
repeat that that he says in the play
that just are like, you know, you hear
them and they kind of stick to you. They
are real, it's really awful.
>> And then the second thing,
>> the thing that makes me angry about the
show
>> is
>> and angry at the show when the show
succeeds at like
>> No, no, I this is angry at the show is
that it implies to me it implies that
there's a cost. It's like the wife
>> hears him say something and she's like,
"I don't know about that." There's a
beautiful maidcook
who listens to him say the really bad
thing and she's like, "I don't know
about that."
>> This is It's doing the work for us. It's
doing the work for us.
>> It is. And there's this promise that
maybe you know what, he did this bad
thing. Don't worry. Don't worry
audience. There will be a punishment.
Guess what? There wasn't he stays
beloved until he's in the ground. he
stays beloved until he to 2016,
right? There's no there is no cost. And
so for me, the the problem with shaping
it into a play is that in order for the
play to do the shape that a play has is
it has to end with rut row, they hurt
him, something bad will happen to him.
>> And then you know because you live in
the world that's not what happened to
Rald Doll. When I grew up reading James
and the Giant Peach, no one was like,
>> well, you know, you know, he's a
terrible anti-semite, but good luck with
the peach situation. You know, don't eat
any big fruit. And you know, it's so
there's a
>> I don't know. It doesn't trust me. It
doesn't trust me.
>> The social network problem. You know,
the movie The Social Network where it's
like, and you know what, girls in school
didn't like him and you think, "Sorry,
he married his college sweetheart."
>> Right. Right. Okay. Enough about me. I
mean le let's actually just talk about
you know I am always curious about how
people who practice criticism practice
the criticism not so much the thinking
and the synthesizing that we do in our
work but how do you physically do the
job so for instance you know I
you know I don't like to I don't like to
watch a lot of movies after I eat lunch
right these are like things like this
like I'm tired. I'm tired. I'm going to
fall asleep.
>> Um, so I'm wondering what your I mean
some of your just procedural methodology
is when you are out in the world and
watching things. Do you see things more
than once? Do you have a rule against
watching them more than once? What? Talk
to me.
>> So um it is very handy in the theater
that most of that is decided for you. Uh
curtains at 8 and so [clears throat]
that's where I should be. Uh, and so a
lot of what I I would never see a show
twice simply because of the practical
um project of trying to see everything
in New York.
>> So if you're trying to see every show
that's happening in New York, you need
to see eight shows a week and you need
to do that 52 weeks.
>> So you working like you're on Broadway
or in the in the theater. Okay.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I [laughter] have a
powerful ho hoofers mentality and so uh
so I don't really see shows more than
once but so this actually gets to the
question of like practically how is
theater criticism done differently from
other kinds of criticism a lot of times
you're looking at something that you
have a very long relationship with
>> so right half of the time I'm seeing a
show uh if I see Our Town on Broadway I
have seen 12 Our towns starting in high
school and going until now I've also
might have been in our town.
>> I have not. No, [laughter] no. My my
powerful acting career is luckily in the
pre-cell era and um but the [laughter]
but you have these long relationships
with plays. So you come into the space
and you sort of simultaneously you do
this little trick where you
simultaneously remember everything you
know about it. So what do I know about
Henry IV?
>> Okay. And then you also try and forget
it at the same time because you're
supposed to be there with the art that's
in front of you.
>> [snorts]
>> So, it's a little bit of a sort of zen
practice like you are. You you try to
make yourself a neutral slate.
>> And then, uh, practically what I do is I
take a ton of notes. I I write down
almost everything that's happening while
I'm watching it. Uh, because otherwise I
tend to start to dream a little bit. You
know, I do start to think about the last
time I saw Henry IV. And so, you see the
notebook keeps you grounded.
>> You It keeps you there. It keeps you in
the moment. It's like snapping your
fingers and saying, "No, it's right now.
Helen, you're looking at this Henry IV."
And that's very handy.
>> I mean, sometimes you might be watching
this Henry IVth and wish you were
watching one from five Henry IVs ago.
>> But you can't let your mind do that.
That's not what But I'm just saying.
>> Yeah, that's what that's what a civilian
[laughter]
>> Okay.
>> Um All right. So, let's talk about what
is happening this year. You went to a
bunch of shows.
>> Talk to me about some things that worked
and didn't work for you.
>> Okay. So, one thing that really worked
for me was uh nostalgia. So it was a
>> nostalgia worked for you.
>> Yes. And here's how. So you would think
so there are shows like Schmegadun which
is a musical which is entirely
nostalgic.
>> Purely nostalgia. It's like do you
remember the golden age of musicals? If
not we will cram them down.
>> Regular people. Yes.
>> Who like musicals. Oh maybe one of them
does and one of them doesn't. A couple.
>> That's right.
>> Uh she loves them. He hates them. They
get trapped. They get trapped brigadeon
style in the world of a musical.
>> Yes. And then every everybody they
encounter is sort of like a figure from
the music man or a figure from Carousel
or whatever.
>> Classic musicals.
>> Classic musicals. And it so it has this
sense of if there has been a secret part
of you that thought you know why can't
musicals just be like carousel
>> just be Rogers and Hammerstein all day.
>> I know exactly why no
take don't play so many sharps and
flats. And so [laughter] this is deeply
uh pleasurable for that for that kind
[clears throat] of you know
>> I haven't seen it. I saw the television
show
>> warm bath. Warm bath.
>> Okay.
>> Now um but the the part of nostalgia
that really worked for me and this is
something that was just fantastic for me
was the Rocky Horror Show.
>> Oh
>> and do you have a relationship to the
Rocky Horror Picture? You know, I have a
relationship to the time warp as a music
video. That was just a clip from the
movie that got played. Yes.
>> On MTV. [laughter]
>> Yes.
>> It was just Tim Curry. Yes.
>> Just from they just ripped it from the
movie, put it on video video city. Just
pick your video channel. There was the
time warp. [music]
>> [music]
>> And for I I'm trying very hard not to
overshare, but for a person of a certain
>> You're on cannonball, ma'am. There's no
such thing as oversharing.
>> Oh man,
>> what do you what do you want to tell us?
>> So I just feel that in the world of
creating [laughter] a sexual identity.
Oh,
>> that if you take the Phantom of the
Opera and cross it with Frankenferter,
you're pretty [laughter] close to a
young Helen Shaw's ideal man. And I am
sorry that that is
>> Helen. Let me get my phone. I've got
about seven phone numbers for you.
>> Are you available? Do [laughter] you
need Do you need a
>> No, I I
>> Do you need a Franken Frankenfer?
>> This is not a call for help. This is a
call for action which is people should
go to see Luke Evans in this production.
>> Definitely should. He is I just never
think about him is having this
performance in him
>> and he is
>> I don't know where this this is, you
know, this one of those things that like
just seems like it's been living in him
this whole time and nobody asked him to
do it.
>> Agreed. Absolutely. And that I think um
is what I had a good time with this
season. So you were saying like what are
the things I liked? I did like so those
two aspects of nostalgia really worked
for me. And then also another show. So
we were talking about difficulty is one
of the shows that I think had the
highest level of difficulty this season
was a show called Liberation.
>> Oh I missed it. I missed it.
>> Which was a very very beautiful show and
uh it won the Pulitzer. So, you know, it
has been like it's not exactly like a
well-kept secret, but it is about a
woman interrogating both her own
feminism and her mother's feminism. So,
it's sort of a memory play and she takes
us back to the 70s encounter group where
her mother and a group of women tried to
sort of do some consciousness raising
together.
>> Best wall.
>> It's Bess Wall written by Bess Wall who
is a very very um delicate deft touch.
And that was a play that was done in a
very, you know, there was no outrageous
moment. There was no uh sort of
explosive climax. Instead, it was sort
of like this is what conversation can
do. So when I was talking about how much
I love that theater is a forum, this was
like
>> structurally seems built to be exactly
>> a classical Greek forum.
>> Yes. And so there they are in chairs in
front of us echoing the chairs that we
are sitting in the audience and it's
like oh are we in a consciousness
raising group together. Don't mind if I
>> I picked it up I picked up a copy just
to like like I didn't you know I I I've
read some of it but also it was a show
for me that I just heard people talking
about it and it seemed initially like it
was like I shouldn't see this and it's
very you know I'm going to it was it was
obvious what it was doing and it wasn't
working for some women in my life. Mhm.
>> And then about 2 weeks later, I was part
of this other conversation where the
women talking about it were like, "It
was fantastic. This is exactly what I
needed and like this this fight
>> between the generations."
>> Yes.
>> About what feminism even is and is good
for. I was like, "God damn it, I've got
a week to see this thing." Yep.
>> And I'm not going to make it.
>> And you're out of time. Now look, Peter
Cers, who's a great opera director, I
once saw him give a talk and he said, "A
show ends, a show truly ends when the
conversation that night finishes."
>> So a show may take two hours in the
theater.
>> Oh, I see what you mean. Yeah, I see
what he means.
>> When you stop talking about it that
night, that's actually when the curtain
comes down.
>> Oh, I just got a little [laughter] I
just got a little tear in my eye.
>> Peter Sers, you can't you can't turn
your back on him. He'll get you. And so
I think that um so for me shows like
Liberation, Giant, all the things that
we talked about that were limitations of
Giant, I kept talking about it that
night, right? And so
>> I'm still talking about it. My
boyfriend, we go back and forth about I
mean we agree, but then we're like
>> it is trying to do something though,
>> but it just does it didn't it's not it's
not it's doing it in the wrong way. And
I feel like I should turn to camera and
be like, "And that's difficulty."
[laughter]
>> It's right there.
>> Hi. That's difficulty.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so, uh, what else?
>> Okay. Other shows I love. Can we talk
about it? Can we talk about The Big Dog?
>> What's The Big Dog?
>> Death of a Salesman.
>> Oh, yeah. Okay. We could talk about The
Big Dog. Um, I will say personally as I
as I explain what this play is, it's a
play that a lot of American kids
encounter in school for reasons.
>> I I don't want to say I don't
understand. I commend the teachers who
put it in front of me and I commend the
teachers still trying to put it in front
of lots of other students.
>> Um, but it is also a play also. Have you
seen a high school performance of Death
of a Salesman? Because I have.
[laughter]
I've seen 13-year-old Willie Roman.
>> Yeah. Oh, man.
>> But this is a show about a family whose
patriarch is at the end of his career
essentially, but but can't afford to be
>> and his pride won't allow him
>> to be there.
>> And so he's trying trying trying to just
I don't know. I mean, I'm going to say
one last goround in the in the in the
sales business
>> and this production. Anyway, that's
that's the setup basically. That's the
setup. So, what
>> what uh talk to me about what what you
felt, what you thought.
>> So, so for me, this play So, there are
>> there is nothing that's aesthetically
difficult about this play, right? No.
>> You can go to this show.
>> You mean as a as a as a text? Yeah, as a
text you uh it is what is I when I was
trying to define difficulty for myself
when I was thinking about coming here to
talk about it. I was thinking well
what's the opposite of difficulty? Is it
accessibility? Is that the is that its
opposite?
>> It's an Juliet.
>> It's well
>> no shots to an Juliet but that is
>> and yet a shot has been fired. Um but I
think [laughter] that that
>> it's just a candy shop. It's a very
delicious candy shop.
>> That's true. But when you have Death of
a Salesman, Death of a Salesman's
serious I mean it's super serious. It's
about a guy who is and this is a spoiler
going to die and he and [laughter] his
sons in Death of a Salesman Death of a
Salesman the selling isn't going to work
out and he [laughter] is going to
disappoint his sons. His sons will
disappoint him. It's like this terrible
terrible confusion of generations. And
the reason why kids get it in high
school is because it allows teachers to
assign an essay on the American dream
and how the American dream isn't a
dream, but it's a nightmare. And so
those sort of simple thoughts have kind
of attached themselves to this
>> obfuscated. Yeah,
>> exactly. These simple thoughts have been
tied to this difficult play.
>> And so it's not difficult. It's not
difficult to understand. You watch the
guy, he whines, his sons disappoint him,
he disappoints them, death, sadness,
denimal. Okay. But what is hard about it
is that in fact the more times you see
it, the older you get.
>> This is crazy true.
>> Yeah. And it gets harder and harder.
>> Oh my god, Helen. I I don't need to be
crying today, but it is it is actually
true. Um, go on. So for me, this
production, so it stars Nathan Lane, and
Nathan Lane is all he has to do is walk
out on stage and and you can see the
song and dance man who doesn't know what
song is up next.
>> That is that is so beautiful.
>> It's so sad.
>> Yeah. What you just said is beautiful.
and Nathan Lee performance beautiful it
and he's and in this production
>> the sorrow that we have for the
generation that missed it that is a
sorrow that resets every 10 years
>> at every generation
>> and this is the time for that show
>> um it's uncanny how um
punctual this thing is Right. Like it
just it knew
>> it knew it knew we it knew gas prices
would be would be crazy.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. It knew that
>> all we do all day if we're so inclined
is to be on an object where like the new
Willy Lommans are pushing pushing
pushing pushing.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but we're also at a point where like
there's another set of actual Willy
Lmans, right?
um who are being dis and some of those
willy lommens it's going to sound crazy
to say Helen are like 30
>> 35 being displaced by AI I mean there
just so many considerations just on that
front
>> and
this this to me it's may may not be a
difficult play
>> but it is a difficult production to me
>> um do you feel I mean how do you feel
about it as a as a work
>> I mean I love it. I have to say I love
it because to me it is just distilled
sorrow and I I uh like I'm a little bit
of a sicko. I go to theater [laughter]
to be reminded that I'm dying.
>> I mean this is the difficulty. This is
part of what I'm asking, right? This is
part of what I'm asking with this
ambition difficulty question, right?
Like remind us remind me that I am human
but in all the ways I am human. Y
>> and don't be af don't cut any corners.
>> Don't don't spare my feelings. Make it
hard. Yeah. And if you have ever
disappointed a parent,
>> this show is unbearable. If you've ever
disappointed your child, this show is
unbearable. I really like that for me is
why I watch it is that it is it's almost
not different from my life. Do you know
what I mean? Like it's so close to the
things that I feel sorrow.
>> Like your actual like Helen Shaw's life.
>> Well, no. Oh, I mean my parents are very
proud. But what I mean is that it's like
every it it it has there
>> theater is great at creating emotions.
>> It's very good at turning up the volume
and making you feel like you can kick up
your heels. It's very good at making
feel anger. That happens in Giant. It's
very good at making you feel uh a
certain kind of way. That's in Rocky
Horror. But it is also it has this one
emotion that I actually don't think you
get in other media. I don't think you
get it from books. I don't think you get
it from film. Is regret is you are
watching it unfold in front of you and
you can't stop the play from happening.
You can't get up out of your seat. You
can't put the book down on the coffee
table. You can't stop Willie from doing
what he's doing.
>> And so you regret with him the way that
life begins.
>> It didn't have to be this way. It
didn't. Maybe it didn't have to be this
way. But also the tragedy of the play is
>> Yes, it did.
>> Yes, it did. cuz you know, look at this
place. Look at this country.
>> And that's
I feel like Yeah. And that's difficult.
[laughter]
>> Okay, Helen. Um,
listen, Pink is going to like supervise
some Tony's this weekend.
>> Yes, Pink is.
>> Um,
>> yes.
>> I don't know. I mean, we talked about
some shows that are up for some Tony's.
I mean, do you do you care about I mean,
Car
that's not the right way to do it, but
like like what is the value of
giving these out? Um, is there a show
that's up for some Tony's that deserve
to win them?
>> Um,
>> just as a seal of their excellence.
Yeah.
>> Um,
>> I So, for me, what the Tony's are,
number one, it's the most attention that
the country ever pays to the theater.
This is how I found Audrey McDonald was
the Tony's. I had never heard of her
before. Audrey and McDonald when I found
[laughter and gasps]
Right. You just explained why the Tony's
are important, right? Is they find
people who don't know that the theater
is going to be there for them yet and
they're like, "Wait, what's that?"
>> Mhm.
>> And so on this production, on this Tony
Awards night, you're going to have
production numbers from That Cats we're
talking about, which is a sacred space
right now. we are going to have whoever
either Lithco or Lane or whoever win
this award and and it is going to sort
of I don't know for me it's a the big PR
moment which is look what you started
this conversation with was there was a
lot that was disappointing the point of
awards is that we get to the end of a
season and there is too much to love
there's too much to award there are
several races here that I can't call
because I want them both to win,
>> i.e. Nathan Lane and John Lithco,
>> i.e. Ragtime and Cats.
>> Yeah.
>> So, you have this situation where
>> which are both up for best revival of a
musical
>> of a musical. And I think that's what I
love about the Tony's is it says no
matter what kind of like I don't know
sulky, brooding attitude one might have
had during the season, one realizes no
wait a minute, it was an abundance of
riches and aren't we lucky. Helen, I'm
lucky to have you.
>> I really enjoyed this. Thank you.
[music]
>> Thank you for having me on.